Once around, the Orion Nebula.
So, the Orion Nebula is located in the
constellation of Orion in what's called
the sword handle down below Orion's belt
in the middle of the lower part of the
constellation. We think it's about 1,350
light years from us. And that's similar
to the distance to most of the objects
that we see in Orion. It's a fairly
compact grouping both in uh
three-dimensional space rather than just
purely in terms of our line of sight.
Here's a photograph that I took with a
camera leaning over the back fence. And
you can see that we have the three stars
of Orion's belt just above the middle of
the image and then down towards the
lower center, the Orion Nebula in the
sword handle there. easy to see with the
naked eye. It's one of the few
astronomical nebula that you can see
anywhere in the world um with uh without
any optical equipment. Binoculars will
show it better and the better your
telescope, the more you are going to
see.
Going back to early observations, this
is Charles Messier's drawing of the
nebula from his memoirs deac academy
royale in 1771.
And it really does look like that
through the uh telescope. You can see
the
horseshoe shape of the nebula with the
fish's mouth, that dark region poking
into it, the four stars in the center
that make up the trapezium, and the
three in a row there. Those are all
strikingly obvious when you look at it
through a telescope.
William Hershel used his 40ft reflector
to have a look as well and he's drawn it
here. Somewhat more elaborate drawing.
He could obviously see further out into
the outer regions. Um and in particular
you can see the trapezium and the fish's
mouth. Again bearing in mind this
photograph is inside out and backwards
compared to the other one because his
design of telescope didn't have a
secondary mirror. So it went from the
primary straight to the eyepiece using
an angled design for the primary. Uh
that led to some distortions, but it
meant he only had one reflecting surface
and reflectors don't reflect all of the
light. And certainly with the original
specular metal that was being used, um
you didn't want too many of those. So
eliminating Newton's secondary mirror
was a good thing. The first photograph
we have of the Orion Nebula is Henry
Drapers from 1880. And in fact, this is
the first astronomical object to be
photographed at all. So, it's quite a a
milestone in astronomy.
Nowadays, you get photographs like this.
I took this with a 10-in reflecting
telescope and a Nikon camera. And uh
it's shows the nebula quite extensive
regions around it. the dark dust lanes,
the fish's mouth there, the trapezium
overexposed in the center, the pink
color from hydrogen gas, and that green
tinge. And the green tinge was a mystery
for many years. In the early part of the
20th century, people didn't understand
it.
The spectroscope that had been invented
revealed the spectral lines and there
were some that could not be associated
with any known element here on Earth. So
it was thought to be an unknown new
element and given the name nebulum.
Nowadays we know it's actually atomic
oxygen in a doubly ionized state. And
the green is the same green color that
you get for the aurora, the northern and
southern lights, but only happens if the
gas is incredibly tenuous uh near vacuum
conditions, and that's why it wasn't
reproduced at the time.
Here's another better photograph, not
one of mine, that uh I've taken with an
amateur telescope. This one is just
superb. Shows the nebula. You can almost
see the 3D bubblelike nature of the
energy coming from that central region
that's rather overexposed blowing away a
huge cave and creating those bubbles of
material expanding outwards.
Um, this image has been filtered and so
the colors are a little unusual. You
have got the dark brownish dust lanes.
You've got the pinkish red from hydrogen
and the blue light there from the
reflection of the star light, the hot
blue young stars pumping out energy uh
in the high energy blue part of the
spectrum just bouncing back to us off
the gas.
Looking at a more uh colorful image here
using a bit of infrared light. We can
see lots more detail in this
professional image. Uh there's all sorts
going on. There's shock waves, there's
new stars. The more you look, the more
you find. Uh this is a showing we have a
region that's really quite extensive,
about 25 light years from one side to
the other containing about 2,000 times
the mass of the sun. Some in the gas and
dust, some in stars that have already
formed. And right in the center there,
you can see the trapezium just lighting
up the middle of the nebula. We can zoom
in on that like this and see it in more
detail with those four particularly
bright stars.
Galileo actually was the first person to
note them down. He beat almost everybody
to almost everything one way or another,
it seems to me. Um, so in 1617 he
sketched the trapezium and marked what
we now call stars A, C, and D. And
that's his image at the bottom right
labeled alpha, beta, and I think gamma.
Uh, the nllete has changed. It wasn't
until 1673 that the fourth one was
picked out. We now call that one B.
If you zoom in on them, you see more and
more. By 1888, we'd got up to eight
stars within the trapezium cluster. And
we now know that several of those are in
fact binary stars when we use our high
power modern telescopes. Um, this is an
infrared image from the wide field
planetary camera of the Hubble Space
Telescope showing the first five bright
stars A, B, C, D, and E, which are
monsters. They're 15 to 30 solar masses,
which means they won't live an
enormously long time. Perhaps a few tens
of millions of years at best, maybe even
less.
And a 2020 paper suggests that there's
also an intermediate mass black hole
somewhere in this group, perhaps a
hundred solar masses. So, that's a real
monster. That's too big to have been
formed from a single star. It's likely
that this has originated in some other
means, perhaps by the merger of several
smaller ones that have all been formed
close together. Um, but these
intermediate mass black holes, they're
definitely an area of active research,
meaning we don't really understand them.
The nebula itself shows all sorts of
effects of new hot young stars. And this
is uh so-called Kelvin Helmholtz
instability. The ripples uh in the
clouds of material here caused by
radiation pouring from the hot young
stars uh lighting up the remains of the
clouds and causing ripples of turbulence
to form little shock fronts moving
across there.
Chandra X-ray telescope has got involved
and delved deep within the Orion Nebula
to reveal the really hot gas and the hot
young stars and possibly even uh right
in the center there. Maybe that's some
of the material around that 100 solar
mass black hole u emitting possibly a
little bit of a jet right in the center
of the image. and just about make out
some possible lines of jets going up
towards the right hand side there and
down towards the lower left. So maybe
that is what we are seeing there.
What we also see is star jets rather
than black hole jets. We call them her
big harrow objects.
Superheated jets of material coming out
along the spin axis of young stars. This
is caused by the stars spinning up as
material falls down the gravity well
within them and picks up uh velocity
preserving its angular momentum and that
then heats up into an accretion disc and
the material falls in into the proto
star. But some of it gets ionized and
becoming charged. It gets then tangled
up with the extreme magnetic field
caused by the rapidly spinning star and
hurled out along the magnetic spin axis
creating these star jets. And this is
one of them, HH24,
inside the Orion Nebula. You can't see
the central star because of all the
obscuring layers in the equatorial plane
blocking our view of the star itself,
but you have a most fantastic view of
the star jets there.
In other regions of the Orion Nebula, we
can pick up many new star systems, new
solar systems being born, protolanetary
discs, materials swirling around the
stars, viewed from different angles. So
this time rather than seeing the jets,
we're seeing them more pole on and
picking up the uh the rings of material
around the central star or edge on or
seeing the dark shadows of the dust
discs that are being created. Um and
absolutely rich pickings in this region
for being able to look at them. Here are
some uh even closer images of these
propids, these protolanetary discs,
solar systems in formation created uh in
the nebula and imaged by the Hubble
Space Telescope. Uh here's another one.
Absolutely amazing to see these things
in detail. You can see a dark dot on the
right with a central star and then you
can see one with a cocoon, a more
egg-shaped region around it. Um, every
type and imaginable shape of these uh
new solar systems in creation.
So, how old is the Orion Nebula?
Well, many of the stars that we see are
less than 300,000 years old. That's
incredibly young. Some only 10,000. Uh
still really in the pro uh phase, the
prototype
um Ttory stage of stellar development
before they've settled down onto the
main sequence.
Some of them are very massive.
Obviously, we find it easier to find the
really bright ones. And the largest of
those will become supernovi at some
point. And there is evidence that there
have already been some supernovi in and
around this entire region. Perhaps not
in the central part of the Orion Nebula
itself, but very close to it. Um, which
have created things like some runaway
stars that have been hurled out of this
area, uh, which is the subject of
another one of my videos. So perhaps
you'd be interested in looking at that.
But anyway, that was a quick once around
the Orion Nebula, and I'll just leave
you with this most fantastic picture of
the region itself.
Thanks for listening.